Pet ct report followup after treatment

EXAM:  PET CT WHOLE BODY FDG
 
Serum glucose at time of F-18 FDG injection was 116 mg/dL. Patient followed standard dietary/fasting requirements for this exam.
 
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL/MEDS: 
Route: intravenous
fludeoxyglucose F 18 injection USP (FDG F-18),5.58 millicurie
 
TECHNIQUE:  F-18 FDG PET/CT scan was performed from the vertex through the toes with low dose, non-contrast, free-breathing CT images for attenuation correction and anatomic localization (AC/AL), with imaging beginning at approximately 60 minutes after 
radiotracer injection.
 
COMPARISON:  FDG PET/CT dated 2/13/2024, and other previous studies
 
INDICATION:  Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Subsequent treatment strategy. 
 
The patient reports no recent vaccinations.
 
FINDINGS:  Since the prior PET/CT dated 2/13/2024, interval decreased FDG uptake and extent of lytic lesion in the left femoral diaphysis measuring approximately 2.5 cm in craniocaudal dimension with an SUV max of 1.7 (PET image 335), previously 4 cm in 
craniocaudal dimension with an SUV max of 3.3.
 
No new FDG avid osseous lesion.
 
Stable mildly prominent right lower quadrant mesenteric lymph nodes with low-level FDG uptake, favored reactive. The previously noted FDG avid cervical lymph nodes are less prominent on the current exam. No new FDG avid lymphadenopathy.
 
Mildly FDG avid pulmonary opacity in the right lower lobe near the major fissure (SUV max: 2.1, PET image: 122), likely presenting mild inflammatory change.
 
Interval resolution of the previously noted FDG uptake in the right inferior pole kidney.
 
No FDG avid lymphadenopathy. Expected physiologic activity in the thymus. Physiologic musculature activity in the lower extremity.
 
Incidental significant findings on low-dose, noncontrast CT: Minimal mucosal thickening in the sinus. 
 
IMPRESSION:
1. Interval decreased metabolic activity and extent of the biopsy proven left femoral LCH lesion. 
2. No new FDG avid LCH involvement. 
3. Likely inflammatory focal right lung opacity with mild FDG uptake. 
