PET-CT report

EXAM:  PET CT WHOLE BODY FDG
 
Serum glucose at time of F-18 FDG injection was 107 mg/dL. Patient followed standard dietary/fasting requirements for this exam.
 
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL/MEDS: 
Route: intravenous
fludeoxyglucose F 18 injection USP (FDG F-18),5.78 millicurie
 
TECHNIQUE:  F-18 FDG PET/CT scan was performed from the vertex through the toes with low dose, non-contrast, free-breathing CT images for attenuation correction and anatomic localization (AC/AL), with imaging beginning at approximately 60 minutes after 
radiotracer injection.
 
COMPARISON:  No prior PET/CT available for comparison. Outside MRI femur 12/18/2023. Abdominal ultrasound 01/23/2024.
 
INDICATION:  Langerhans cell histiocytosis, biopsy-proven the left femur. No treatment to date. Initial treatment strategy. 
 
The patient reports no recent vaccinations.
 
FINDINGS:  
Mildly FDG avid lytic lesion in the left femur with SUVmax 3.3, compatible with biopsy-proven Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Linear cortical tracks posteriorly from prior CT-guided biopsy. Mildly heterogeneous diffuse bone marrow activity with regions of
 relatively subtle possible focal activity without underlying CT of the body (for example, a left 5th rib laterally and scattered in the spine; see screen captures). No other suspicious osseous uptake. Physiologic activity along the growth plates.
 
Mildly FDG avid bilateral cervical lymph nodes, including right lower cervical/supraclavicular (whole body fused axial image 126). Relatively non-FDG avid to minimally FDG avid mildly prominent right lower quadrant mesenteric lymph nodes (for example, 
series 2, image 188), presumably reactive.
 
Physiologic activity in normal anterior mediastinal thymic tissue.
 
Localized intense FDG activity in the inferior right renal pole, more intense centrally but extending to the cortex, nonspecific favored secondary to retained physiologic activity asymmetrically within a calyx and overlying renal cortex. Intensity of 
uptake centrally in this location is near the intensity of excreted urinary activity in the bladder.
 
Mild activity in the stomach wall near the GE junction (whole body fused axial image 186), presumably related to mild inflammation. Scattered bowel activity, greatest in the distal ileum, presumed physiologic or inflammatory. No abnormal intracranial 
uptake.
 
Significant incidental findings on the low-dose unenhanced CT images: Mild presumed bibasilar lung atelectasis. Splenule. 
 
IMPRESSION:
1.  Mildly FDG avid biopsy-proven Langerhans cell histiocytosis in the left femur. Mildly heterogeneous bone marrow activity without convincing evidence of additional FDG avid histiocytosis involvement.
2.  Mildly FDG avid bilateral cervical lymph nodes, indeterminate but favored reactive. Mildly prominent right lower quadrant mesenteric lymph nodes with minimal if any FDG uptake. Recommend attention on follow-up.
3.  Intense FDG activity in the inferior pole of the right kidney with activity similar to excreted urinary activity, favored secondary to asymmetric physiologic excretion with additional possible causes such as infection (pyelonephritis/abscess) or 
neoplasm considered less likely, especially in the setting of recent reportedly normal ultrasound. Consider attention on follow-up if further PET/CT imaging is planned, otherwise could consider ongoing follow-up with renal ultrasound and/or 
cross-sectional imaging.
